
Whatever you want to know about my plans but couldnt ask yet.  
-------------------------------------------------------------

- My castle is planned as an areal north of Clondike Vill (well, where it
  once has been) and west of Marvin's Desert. If it clashes with sth else, 
  I'll move it on request. 
  I christened it "Dark Plains". They are placed on a high plateau (this
  also moves Clondike Ville on a similar height), which is separated from
  the desert and the north by huge, imclimbable mountains. To the east
  I'll allow the Plains descending down - here some other wizard may
  continue/place it's own castle.
  North of the Plains, beyond the mountains is the sea shore leading north, 
  which will turn to the southeast to connect to the shore north of Marvin's 
  Desert. So we'll have more place in NF to the north.  

- In the plains will be the ruins of a magic castle, being the place
  for a quest (hack'n'slay also as pure adventuring). 
  The quest will consist of several puzzles, which needn't all be
  solved, and not in one session.
  The basic concept is that the player is NOT told what he should do -
  at least not explicitely. So a the quest description would be 
  "Find the Magic Castle [in the Dark Plains] and explore it.", not more.
    I am still working on the concepts and puzzles, so I can't give
  any further detail yet.

- Additionally I'll try to implement a cave, accessible through the desert,
  in which I put the dungeon of DungeonMaster (as far as I know it myself :).

- Also, the good old 'Colossal Cave' awaits its recreation.

- A drug called "Analog": it'll heal massively (about 150 hp) and will cost
  less than 1000 coins. ... Hush, calm down, it will also have massive
  disadvantages: as long as the drug is active, the player wont be able to
  do anything but listen. This period will endure 1..5 minutes. Then: after
  using the drug, the player will get flashbacks every 20 minutes or so,
  making him again passive (though healing him a _bit_). If he's stuck in
  a fight at that moment ... byebye player!
  Maybe I also implement the possibility of "bad trips", healing much less
  or even costing hp. I'll see.
  -- This project is tagged with a big MAYBE --

Btw.: Everything you can read here, you're allowed to read.
      Freeware rules, ok!

BUT: I discourage strongly every usage of objects found in ~mateese/new --
     these are under development and may cause serious damage.

  Mateese, 21-July-93