SYNTAX
  When referencing to items, several forms may be used. We tried to
  use nearly-natural language for the commands, but don't expect too
  much :-)

  The simplest is using a short identifier, like in 'get sword',
  optionally with articles: 'get the sword' or 'get a sword' are equal
  to 'get sword'.

  To distinguish several items, they may be specified further using
  adjectives (if they have one): 'look at the yellow sword'.

  If there are several swords, you may specify an ordinal or simply
  append the number to select a specific thing: 'get 5th sword', 'get
  the fifth sword' and 'get 5. sword' are equal to 'get sword 5' and
  all specify the (guess what) fifth sword.
  Pitfall: 'get a fifth sword' is not possible.

  You may also specify things placed in containers, like 'get sword
  from bag' or 'examine gem in chest'. Deeper nestings are not
  supported (i.e. no 'put sword into bag in chest in rucksack').
  Pitfall: the commands do not really distinguish 'in' and 'from'.
    Both commands 'take gem in bag' and 'take gem from bag' are equal.
  
  Some commands allow multiple objects to be specified, by listing
  them using commans and 'and', i.e. 'give torch, bag and chest to Ryuka'. 
  Pitfall: if the things are in containers, you have to specify the
    container each time, i.e. 'drop torch from bag and gem from bag'.

  Another way to specify multiple objects is using plurals:
  both 'all torches', 'every torch' and 'torches' all refer to every
  torch lying around. Similar, 'all' and 'everything' denote all
  things at once.
  Additionally, you can specify 'every torch except the third', or
  'everything but the weapons'.

  Nested multiple objects are also allowed: 'gems in bag' and 'all
  gems in bags' are both valid.
  Pitfall: to get all gems from a bag, except for the red ones, you
    have to specify 'all gems but the red from bag'

  A subset of commands allows to handle a certain number of items,
  e.g. 'drop three beers', 'fondle 3 coins' (this is called a 'counted
  plural').

  Pitfall: worn and wielded objects cannot be specified that simply -
    for them you have to add 'really' in the front: 'really all',
    'really every weapon'. This may sound awkward, but makes life
    easier.

  The things are searched in the environment and/or in your inventory,
  with the order depending on the actual command. 
  You may
    - insert 'my' somewhere to search just in your inventory.
    - append 'here' to search just in your environment.
    - append 'outside' to search in the outside of your current room
      (useful when e.g. sitting in a cart).
  Examples: 'look at my torch', 'take key from bag here', 'look at orc
  outside'.

NOTE
  Not all commands support the syntax to its full extend yet.
  We're working on changing that.

SEE ALSO
  equipment
