From petri@ibr.cs.tu-bs.de  Sat Jun  5 02:44:26 1993
Received: from ra.ibr.cs.tu-bs.de by nova.tat.physik.uni-tuebingen.de (911016.SGI/LOCALGATE-V1.7mx)
	id AA00674; Sat, 5 Jun 93 02:44:26 +0200
Received: by ra.ibr.cs.tu-bs.de (5.65/1.341)
	id AA04425; Sat, 5 Jun 93 02:44:03 +0200
Date: Sat, 5 Jun 93 02:44:03 +0200
From: petri@ibr.cs.tu-bs.de (Stefan Petri)
Message-Id: <9306050044.AA04425@ra.ibr.cs.tu-bs.de>
To: dack@darmstadt.gmd.de, gamesmgr@nova.tat.physik.uni-tuebingen.de
Subject: bert@esu.edu (Herbert Emert) Mud paper
Cc: mateese@ibr.cs.tu-bs.de
Status: RO


und dafuer kassiert der typ ein ``grade A diploma'' ab ...

                                    "X" Marks the Spot

                                    (TABLE OF CONTENTS)



In Grateful Appreciation ...
(ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2



The Motivation Behind the Madness
(PREFACE). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2


        A Word from Our Sponsor.
        (A Comment on the results) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3

        The Narrow Path
        (General Instructions) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5



Getting Down and Dirty 
(An Introduction to MUD) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5


        "Once Upon a Time..."
        (MUD History). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

        The Nitty Gritty 
        (The Survey method, results and summary) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8


               A Two Edged Sword
               (Difficulties in Organization). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8

               The M.O.
               (The approach to our research). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   8

               The number scrunching
               (A Comment on the statistics) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9

               The Dirt
               (Survey results). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10



Our farewell address 
(Summation and final comments) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  21
                               In Grateful Appreciation ...
                                    (ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS)
        A large note of gratitude must be sent out to the administrators of the "Kender Kove MUD"
(MUD standing for Multi-User Dungeons) environment for their help in contacting other MUD
administrators around the world and generally encouraging many of their MUD participants to fill
out a survey for this document.  Our appreciation must also be extended to the numerous MUD
participants who completed surveys.  Their responses were brimming with openness and honesty
which has enabled us to construct a piece that we hope reflects the personality of the "MUD
society" that is the basis for this document.

                             The Motivation Behind the Madness
                                         (PREFACE)
        Coinciding with the need for a topic on which to build this paper several incidents, which
need not be specified, brought us to the awareness MUD (Multi-User Dungeons, a Computer
based role-playing game that can be accessed through the Internet).  Not willing to invest the long
hours it seemed to require for learning to play, it was determined this paper offered the unique
opportunity of fulfilling the topic requirement and of learning about MUD by investigating "How MUD
was affecting the people who role-play."  It also seemed that a non-partisan view would be the best
vantage point from which to approach the study and so that the assessments made would be as
free from emotion as possible.  After some consultation a survey was developed and circulated
through East Stroudsburg University and then later to several MUD administrators around the
world.
        Our general intent was to take a look how MUD is affected peoples lives, which some
participants had little difficulty dealing with and were able to with a frankness that was stunning at
times. Here is a sample of the survey questions as they were circulated through the network.

To: MUD users everywhere 

Subject: MUD Survey

1.)  How long have you been on the MUD?

2.)  How often are you involved on the MUD?

3.)  What first started you on the MUD?

4.)  Is it the same reason why You still participate?

5.)  Why do you still participate?

6.)  Do you have goals on the MUD? 

7.)  Are your goals different from when you first started?

8.)  How many close friends do you have on the MUD?

9.)  Have these friendship lead to closer relationships in real life?

10.) What are the positive and negative influences of the MUD?

11.)   MUD Identity:

       Name: (optional)

       Age: (optional)

       Gender:

       Occupation: (optional)

       Game status:

       Family standing: (optional) 

       Comments:   


12.)   Personal Identity: 

       Age:

       Gender: 

       Occupation: 

       School status: 

       Family standing: 

       Comments:  


        All participants have given their permission to use the information gathered for their survey
in any way necessary to fulfill the requirements of this document as long individual identities remain
anonymous.

                                 A Word from Our Sponsor.
                                (A Comment on the results)
        This survey has been partisan form it inception and should not be considered a random
sample survey.  As a result it is highly likely that the results are skewed in favor of those still
involved with MUD.
For example: Only individuals who are currently involved with MUD or a network were able
to respond to the survey.             First this would essentially sending notices to site on the
network while creating a tremendous amount of email, if the addresses could be obtained. 
Second, even though the majority of MUD sites are located at colleges many Universities such as
Queens and the University of Delaware have banned MUD participants from playing on college
facilities.  Relative to this is the likelihood that if a student flunked out of school (for such reasons
as MUD activity) they would no longer have access to MUD or the network.
For example: The response was selective.  Only those individuals with enough initiative or
drive responded to the survey.               For instance, a very low percentage of local (East
Stroudsburg University) students responded to the survey request while surveys were received
from all over the world and the United States: (countries) Australia, Finland, the United Kingdom,
among others; (U.S.A.) Colorado, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, and more.
        It should also be noted that a large number of the responses came from MUD system
administrators (approximately forty percent, 40%).  It is conceded that these individuals have a
slightly different perspective on MUD activity, and yet as a whole the information transmitted was,
on the whole, conscientious and honest which it is felt makes up for an over zealousness
encountered. 
        The results and assumptions made in the following pages may appear to be generalizing
about all MUD participants it is only referencing directly to the survey responses received.  At most
this document should be considered a small glimpse of MUD "Society" rather than comprehensive
study of MUD "life".  For those who may be unfamiliar with the type of game that MUD is can refer
to APPENDIX C which contains a transcript of a short MUD session.
        As a side note for detail oriented individuals it may be noticed that in the Examples given
after several of the survey questions and in the overall results in Appendix B
that there are odd character strings (as an example " :) ", or " :-) " a sideways smile ).  These and
words expressed like " *sigh* , or *shrug* " are ways that players use to inject a higher level of
communication than simple command line or stream of ASCII characters can allow.


                                      The Narrow Path
                                  (General Instructions)
        To help those with limited computer knowledge various terms and confusing jargon, which
is at the nature of the topic, a glossary of terms has been included in APPENDIX A.  The word or
phrase included in the glossary will be indicated in the text by highlighting.  Only when a word,
phrase or abbreviation is uniquely required to continue the development of the text will its
description be inclosed in parenthesis' "()".  An apology is offered to the more technically oriented
readers for what may seem to be redundant or over simplified information.  
        The survey data, included in APPENDIX B, and excerpts used as examples in the text may
exhibit a tendency to abbreviate with little adherence to any form abbreviation rules (ie: RL = real
life, VR = virtual reality,  MOO = Object Oriented MUD site and so on).  Where it has been
considered necessary these terms have been included into the Glossary (APPENDIX A).  However,
due to the considerations of time and space the delineation of some terms has been passed over.

                                  Getting Down and Dirty 
                                 (An Introduction to MUD)
        The telephone wires carry more then just the peaceful conversations of the teaming
masses and the continual flow of business information at the speed of light.  These wires and fiber
optic cables are more than the electronic high technology pathways for the dozens of public access
networks that blanket the surface of the earth.  They are also the dusty roads, caverns and
byways that lead to another time, another place and in some instances other worlds.  It is an
peculiar marriage of space age communications, imagination, and fantasy / fiction that combine into
a rainbow of role playing games that are generally referred to as MUD or "Multi-User Dungeons". 
MUD attracts hundreds and possibly thousands of participants to its various halls, rooms, and
imagined landscapes every day to indulge in a little role playing odyssey similar to "Dungeons and
Dragons", or D & D as it is commonly known.
        Our goal was to determine what affect MUD is having on the lives of people who are a part
of the "MUD Society."  To this end a twelve (12) question survey was circulated over the Internet
public access network which East Stroudsburg University is connected.  The questions were a mix
of pragmatic information (How long individuals have been playing), personal assessment
(Determining positive and negative aspects of the game) and profiles of their personal and MUD
identities).
        For the purposes of our research MUD is referred to as a singular entity, there are in truth
somewhere in the neighborhood of two to three hundred MUD sites world wide with dozens of
themes and all of which have roots that go back thirty plus years.  If it appears that this information
is sketchy it is because there is little clearly documented MUD history.  For the our purposes there
were two difficulties: the most accurate resources were not made available, or those resources did
not respond in a timely manner so their data could be included into the compilation of this
document.  MUD sites are not regulated by a common body of interest like the Federal
Communications Commission (F.C.C), or the Federal Trade Commission (F.T.C.) that could keep
track of specific facts a figures on the various games sites.  To complicate matters a MUD site can
spring up, seemingly over night, at a college, university or company so it is difficult to ascertain
exactly how many or where they may be located.  The closest thing to a directory of MUD sites is
the Totally Unofficial Internet MUD List that is circulated to many MUD sites and some network
bulletin boards.  Most of what will be stated here has been learned from a few of the sixty one
individuals that responded to our survey.  

                                   "Once Upon a Time..."
                                       (MUD History)
        The first MUDs where the AberMUDs.  Around 1969 two programmers constructed the first
virtual reality game area called "MUD".  They were popular, however, they did not offer much for
the player who wanted to attain the status of Wizard (a high ranking player / possibly an
administrator).  AberMUDs were also relatively inflexible as far as making additions or
improvements (conceived during a moment of inspiration) once a MUD site was operational.  With
these factors in mind Lars Pensjo (pronounced Pens'-joe) developed the first generations of
LP-MUD.  At this point MUD became a more attractive real time game with interactive
bookkeeping to track the treasure, weapons and point amassed by a player.  As public access
networks began to weave companies an colleges into the fabric of our current communication
highways MUD began to propagate.  Mr. Pensjo's prototype site, Genesis-MUD (which still attracts
players today), was a resource for what is still considered the "true-blue" LP-MUD source code. 
Although Mr. Pensjo has retired from writing code for LP-MUD's (as of 1992), He can still be found
occasionally wandering the electric halls of Genesis-MUD.
        Armed with the flexibility of MUD source code, access to a computer and some
imagination a Wizard or Wizards could create a MUD, "in their own likeness" if you will, for the
enjoyment of their local and visiting players.  Soon their evolved a genealogy of MUDs developing
as technologies and interests changed (for example, MUD begot AberMUDs which begot
TinyMUDs , DikuMUDs and LP-MUDs which will someday lead to what ever the next flavor of MUD
will be called).  The variations of MUDs do not end with technological improvements.  Several
Wizards have traded in their wands, cone-shaped hats and fire breathing dragons for Private
Investigator badge, a silk banded felt hat and piece of iron that belches lead as they created
murder / mystery worlds that would make any "Gumshoe" Novelist proud, and it does stop there. 
There is a Shogun / Ninja MUD, a MUD based on the desert world form Frank Herbert's Dune,
another is MUD based on futuristic vision of Gene Roddenberry's Star Trek (the Original and "Next
Generation") along with various other technological worlds and Dungeon and Dragon MUD realms
in assorted looks and flavors.
        If an individual desires to learn about creating a MUD there are resources other than
Genesis-MUD.  Tmi-2-MUD, The "MUD Institute" at Northeastern University in the United States,
is a MUD development site and the place for state-of-the-art information on LP-MUDs: what's new,
what's in development, and where they believe LP-MUDs will be going (address
tmi.ccs.northeastern.edu, ip=129.10.10.32, port=5555).  LPCC, "The LPC Center" in the United
Kingdom, is a learning center for the basics of "LPC" (Lars Pensjo C language, similar to C and
C++, address victoria.city.ac.uk, ip=?, port=2999).

                                     The Nitty Gritty 
                         (The Survey method, results and summary)

                                     A Two Edged Sword
                              (Difficulties in Organization)
        The answers received for some questions where multi-dimensional (as is most human
reasoning).  Leaving us to group the answers into general areas which was crucial to placing the
results into any sort of organization.  This also addresses a major problem / asset to our survey. 
The loose organization of the questions lead to a high level of openness, which has been important
to us from the beginning.  However, forming the answers into a cohesive format was difficult (ie:
the same question that was answered as a concise Yes or No from on player might receive half
a page of motivations experience for another player), so we plead your indulgence if some answers
are grouped into categories that may seem fragmented.

                                         The M.O.
                              (The approach to our research)
        Since the focus of our research was to determine the social affects on the people who
participate on MUD we determined to take the direct approach and ask them a small array of
questions that form the basis for our survey.  Distribution of the survey was done through Internet
electronic mail or email and by posting a copy of the survey on our own local network. The survey
was sent to several MUD administrators who posted it on their electronic bulletin boards
respectively, while some individuals heard about it and requested a survey been sent to them
directly.  Of the approximately one hundred surveys that were distributed there were Sixty one (61)
responses.  It is difficult estimate what the response ratio due to the fact there is no way of
knowing how many people were made aware of survey versus those who responded.  The closest
approximation that could be given would a twenty to thirty percent (20 - 30%) rate of response,
based on personal observation and conversations with various MUD players.
        The format for each question will be a subdivision into categories: Intent, Results, Summary
(and Examples).  The complete body of survey results, sorted into individual questions, is included
in the APPENDIX B.  This data is very much in the same form as was submitted, only the most
rudimentary spelling checking and editing has been done.

                                   The number scrunching
                               (A Comment on the statistics)
        Due to the nature of the data some compromises had to be made for the benefit of the
calculations.  All values that fell between the desired amounts were rounded up to the next whole
number (ie: 3 weeks = 1 mo).  Also a mean value was used in place of any range was given as
an answer for calculating the overall results (ie: 20 - 30 hours = 25 hours).  To eliminate as much
confusion as possible where possible all other statistics will be given as rational numbers (ie: 12/59
or 50 of 59) along with a straight percentages alone which might be misleading.
        The following is for those of us who need to be refreshed on the Statistical terminology
every so often: Range, shows the minimum and maximum response;  Mode, relates the most
common answer given; Mean, gives an average of the answers; Variance, measures the amount
the values varied from standard distribution (also used to determine the Standard Deviation);
Standard Deviation, demonstrates the amount the answers varied from a standard deviation;
Standard Error, indicates the accuracy of the Standard Deviation (the lower the number the better).


                                         The Dirt
                                     (Survey results)

1.)    How long have you been on the MUD?
                                          INTENT
                 to gauge the level of the respondents experience on MUD.
                                          RESULTS
                               The Statistics:  (in months)
        Range = 1 to 48,      Mode    = 24,                 Mean = 17.67, 
        Variance = 15.22,     Standard Deviation = 3.90,    Standard Error = 0.50
(See the section "The number scrunching" for the general definition of these terms.)
                                          SUMMARY
The responses for this question varied from simple numbers to dates, to a complete accounting
of when and where some individuals had started playing on different MUDs.  For the most part the
largest number of participants were clustered along the lower side of the distribution between one
month (1) and the Mode (24 months).  This could indicate a several different ideas depending on
how the numbers are interpreted.  
        First, there is a tapering off enthusiasm or waning of interest as the players become more
familiar with the pitfalls (no pun intended) in the various MUD zones.  Second, those who had more
experience on MUD were to fanatical to bother responding.  Thirdly, since the bulk of players are
college students, involvement in MUD would naturally lessen during their junior and senior year. 
Finally after students leave school (either with or without a diploma) they are unable to either
connect or afford connecting up to MUD over their personal phone.  
        (These statistics do not include the time elapsed between the gathering of this information
and the compilation of this document.)

2.)    How often are you involved on the MUD?
                                          INTENT
to assess the degree of importance placed in MUD by measuring 
the number of hours spent involved on MUD.
                                          RESULTS
                         The Statistics:  (hours spent each week)
        Range = 1 to 60,      Mode    = 10,                 Mean = 18.72,
        Variance = 173.52,    Standard Deviation = 13.17,   Standard Error = 1.70
(See the section "The number scrunching" for the general definition of these terms.)
                                          SUMMARY
These results generally had a more normal distribution then question one (1).  With several
responses clustered around ten (10), twenty (20), twenty five (25) and thirty (30) hours per week. 
These numbers are based on various estimations and in some cases an average of the range
submitted (ie: 20 to 30 hours became 25 hours).
        Although it was expected that MUD involved a great deal of time is was still surprised be
several answers, some of which will be shown here (the remainder of which can be reviewed in
Appendix B).
                                         EXAMPLES
2) Infinity MUD: 15 - 25 hours, HMC MUD: 1 hour, Furry MUD: 30 - 40 hours. (Note: I
have a tendency to Multi-MUD)

2) maybe 2 hours a week, but I will go for months without getting on and then binge by
spending 20 hours on MUD in just a few days.

2) I am logged on a average of 50 hours a week; this is largely idle time however.  Active
time I would estimate about 20 hours per week.



3.)    What first started you on the MUD?
                                          INTENT
to determine the initial cause of their interest in MUD.  
How did they hear, come to know about, or first become attracted to MUD?
                                          RESULTS
The overwhelming response was that the individual had heard about MUD through a friend, their
family or any number of close acquaintances (31 / 61, 51%).  This group might also include those
who heard about MUD by word-of-mouth (9 / 61, 15%).  The second most common reason was
of people who had stumbled across MUD (18 / 61, 30%) either through a general notice on an
network Bulletin Board or by using telnet to rlogin into MUD in a case of pure serendipity.  The
remaining participants either gave no response or their response was unrelated to our the question
(3 / 61, 4%).
                                          SUMMARY
The results seemed to agree with the theme of an article by Deva B. Winblood who noted how
MUD players pass their enthusiasm for the game on to other people as form of social disease.
The explorer stumbles onto MUD and plays for an hour or so.  Then the explorer sees a
few friends and says "Hey, I found a neat game, come on and check it out."  Things go
well at first, as many of the explorer's friends that only have a passing interest in
computers begin to play these games with enthusiasm and interest. (D. Winblood, "MUDS:
The Social Computer Virus" Org_Zine Vol.1:Issue.1 Information Communication Supply
(I.C.S.), address ORG_ZINE@WSC.COLORADO.EDU)
This little narrative is a common scenario as "Explorer" (MUD-oholic elect) draws their friends into
be mired in MUD until they are apart of an ever widening circle of players competing on different
MUDs all over the world.  


4.)    Is it the same reason why You still participate?
                                          INTENT
to see if and how their motivations that include participating on MUD have changed.
                                          RESULTS
Unlike some of the questions the survey many of the answers were a simple yes (10 / 61, 16%)
or no (34 / 61, 56%); some were undecided (yes & no, 13 / 61, 21%) while again some stragglers
gave unusable answers (4 / 61, 7%).
                                          SUMMARY
These results begin to show greater evidence that MUD is not at static medium but is more a
breeding ground for the development of electronic "society".  While some people may be attracted
by the initial encouragement of a friend, many people develop their own unique relationship with
other MUD players or are excited by role playing aspects of the game.
                                         EXAMPLES
4) Absolutely not.  This began to change as I got to know some of the people on MUD,
and found myself becoming more interested in them, than in the game.  Greedy players
and a bad interface encouraged me more towards the chatting side, but I found enjoyment
there anyway.

4) Yes, it partly is, although I have two jobs on two different MUDs: I am an Arch Wizard
at BatMUD and a God at PrimeTime LP-MUD (both in Finland).  So the coding and
maintenance have become the top things why I still participate, but I still haven't forgotten
the "MUD Society" :)
(see Wizard in the glossary for the terms Arch Wizard and God)

5.)    Why do you still participate?
                                          INTENT
to document the change in MUD social status which we eluded in our last question.
                                          RESULTS
Here, as in the next several questions, the answers began to diverge from simple yes and no
answers or a simple number (see "A Two Edged Sword).  However, the data did suggest some
general categories.  To interact or meet and socialize with other players was a consistent thread
through most of the responses.  To administrate MUD, Learn Object Oriented programming,
Create New and Better MUDs or wield Power,  was the second major motivation.  To find
entertainment and pass time inexpensively was the next.  Then there is another gathering of host
of lesser reasons (only in number).  These reasons had a minimum of two (2) variations on a
common theme.  Some enjoyed the challenge of the Game, while others liked following the social
developments, or just plain eavesdropping.  While others were motivated to relax and escape, to
stretch personal creativity, or to show an out pouring of gratitude or loyalty to the MUD.
                                          SUMMARY
This is an example of what we had mentioned earlier about the fact that a large number of
respondents were Administrators.  As interesting as running a MUD must be, if it were everyone's
goal there would be no one left to play as a Mortal (or novice player).  The main reason for
participating on MUD is entertainment.  Weather this means playing the game or electronically
interacting with other players in a social environment.
                                         EXAMPLES
5) I have built many strong friendships via MUD which I keep up by using that medium,
since we are often separated by RL (real life) distance.  Also I enjoy questing (working
puzzles), and the challenge imposed by defining the rules of interaction and behavior in
a new kind of society.  As a God on my home MUD, and the author of the etiquette
document, I have an opportunity to learn to lead in ways I could never approach in RL.

6.)    Do you have goals on the MUD?
                                          INTENT
to further define their reasoning behind MUD involvement while beginning 
to build a model of MUD as a society.
                                          RESULTS
Many participant had many goals while others professed to have none.  There was a first place
tie between in this area: wanting to be a Wizard and to improve the game or make an enjoyable
environment.  A close second was the "I have no goals" crowd with third place going to those who
want to meet people or observe and participate in a developing MUD society.  Next we had
another tie with the answers to be helpful and well respected and a definite yes, but without
explanation while others merely wanted to be entertained.  The remaining response had minimum
of one to three endorsements: advance their character, attract players, learn object oriented
programming, and maintain personal sanity.
                                          SUMMARY
(While the goals laid out by the administrators are both plentiful and obvious we will look closer to
the other various answers.)  Although several individuals did not have any goals we will assume
that they are not mindless in there pursuits on MUD.  It is more likely that these people did not
want to take time to determine if in deed they have goals.
        It is more probable that the same drive that involves people in everything from eaves-
dropping, pen-pal correspondence, or calling any of many "party line" phone numbers across the
nation is the same motivation at work here on MUD.  People like to talk to other people; however,
between the Media in general and magazines like Glamour, GQ, Essence and other sources
attempting to tell everyone what is good or bad, beautiful or ugly.  It has become increasingly
difficult to just talk to people with judging them according the subliminal standards that inundate
us from every angle.  MUD provides a oasis from these types of interchanges.  Thus, people
gravitate to an environment that is inter-active (you give someone a *hug* and someone else "hugs
you back deeply"), unlike a letter or email where the response is delayed by hours days or weeks.
                                         EXAMPLES
6) At the time, it was to design a role-playing MUD that was both fun for the people to
interact and role-play, as well as to see if I could get my own off the ground with a wizard
crew that knew how to run one.  The result was the AmberMUSH (or MUD). Goal
achieved, time to quit.

6) to get married to the girl I am engaged to.

6) to meet others, learn about their culture and lives. To help myself stay sane.

7.)    Are your goals different from when you first started?
                                          INTENT
to gather data on the influences of MUD as they develop over time.
                                          RESULTS
As might be expected the three major answers were Yes, No and Maybe with a one or two
unrelated answers and a few that refused to answer at all.  The No answers were usually short and
to the point (14/61, 23%) and while several Yes answers held to the same concise response while
others included a rainbow of comments.  Their reasons stated, they were more ambitious (8/61,
13%), they were less ambitious (5/61, 9%), they wanted to work on programming MUD more (6/61,
10%), they enjoyed the social side of MUD more (2/61, 3%), they were having more fun (1/61, 2%). 
The remainder of the Yes answers were to diverse to fit neatly into any of these categories (6/61,
10%).  The few answers that are left over either did not seem to relate to the question or consisted
of an abstention.
                                          SUMMARY
More and more there is evidence that the various MUDs around the world are forming electronic
"societies".  Even if their focus is narrow and utilitarian in nature with a little bit of pseudo-theocracy
thrown in, it is believed that enough evidence could be gathered on MUDs to fulfill the criteria
needed to define MUD in this way.
                                         EXAMPLES
7) Yes, because when I first started it was solely for social reasons.  I never ran (a MUD)
at all.  Now I do both (talk and run.

7) Definitely!  My goals are now more ambitious, if nothing else.

7) Yup... I realize that MUD can only be a hobby or entertainment and that one should
never miss life for it.  That means that I spend less time on MUDs now than before, but
still more than non-MUD-playing people would believe :)

7) Yes, when I first started I didn't know about MUD marriages.  Once I knew that it
became my goal.

7) When I first started on MUD I was goal-less.  This was because I didn't know what a
goal was.

8.)    How many close friends do you have on the MUD?
                                          INTENT
to interpret the affect of MUD on personal relationships.
                                          RESULTS
Not wanting to place a number value on friendship the decided majority (60/61, 98%) said they had
made friends.  Much confusion was generated about the word "close" so many participants
classified their relationships in to categories.
                                          SUMMARY
MUD seem to be a dynamic forum for getting to know people.  One respondent relayed an
interesting note that truly demonstrates this point.  A recent article chronicled the appearance of
MUD-like networks appearing some bars in the bay area of California.  These "MUD bars" have
imbedded computers in the table tops so that patrons can communicate in a very similar fashion
to MUDs or IRCs.  Free of the judgments based on physical appearance, people can meet in a
more relaxed atmosphere then the regular "bar scene".  Weather it is two tables at a pub
separated by a few feet or two terminals separated by several miles, race, gender, weight, physical
limitations or attractiveness is a mute point on MUD.  Yes, there is a danger of becoming isolated
from other people.  Yes, it might be easy for people to replace MUD reality for life's reality.  But,
these dangers exist with or without the influence of MUD.  At least on MUD the people who are
intimidated by others or intimidating to others get together and talk.  (Those who fear electronic
isolation might fell better after reviewing the results from the next question.)
                                         EXAMPLES
8) Many, You meet many people over MUD, and many of them become helpful contacts
and friends in RL (real life).

8) Unlike many people, I don't consider any of my MUD friends to be 'close' friends. I do
consider some favorite people I love chatting with tho...  If I didn't see these people (on
MUD), often, MUDs would become boring for me... and not worth my time...

9.)    Have these friendship lead to closer relationships in real life?
                                          INTENT
to evaluate the affect of MUD on creating relationships and if these 
friendships carry over into real life.
                                          RESULTS
The edge goes to those who have found real life friendship (36/61, 59%) over those who have not
(22/61, 41%).  Again there was some discussion about what is a 'closer' relationship.
                                          SUMMARY
Even though several of the participants said "No" many of them were qualified answers that may
have been interpreted either way.  While many of the answers on the positive side were
resounding agreement with extended comments that detail incidents and example.
                                         EXAMPLES
9) No, but I already have that (friends) in RL (real life so, I am not looking for that on MUD. 
>From seeing how other MUD relationships turn out I wouldn't advise it.

9) Definitely.  I have had two of my MUD friends come to visit me and was even engaged
to one of them in real life.  Also I have spoken to about seven <?> of my MUD friends and
let's just say I am one of AT&T's best customers.

9) I started off with a MUD boyfriend, which turned into a real life boyfriend when I went
to visit him (during vacation) which turned into a real life fiance and now he is really my
husband!

9) Not real close friendship, but when I travel through the country I visit several of them,
or they come to see me.

9) In a few cases I may have meet people that I otherwise would not have started a
conversation with.

10.)    What are the positive and negative influences of the MUD?
                                          INTENT
to develop how honestly MUD members assess the influences of their current involvement.
                                          RESULTS
As might have been guessed the positive influences out numbered the negative (18/12).  
The positive influences listed are that MUD (in order of popularity), develops social skills, improves
programming skills, assists in making friends, offers a place to unwind and relax, liberates people
socially and emotionally , improves typing skills, builds creative skills, is enjoyable to play, builds
computer skills, broadens creative skills, encourages leadership, offers a challenge, adds to a
sense of belonging and reduces loneliness, provides an inexpensive to pastime, builds confidence,
improves spelling, discourages cliques, and could help in the learning of a second language.
The negatives influences listed are that MUD, leads to an emotional addiction, consumes massive
quantities of time, results in people losing contact with real life friends, is taken to seriously by the
players, ties up the phone, costs to much in phone bills, encourages procrastination, leads to bad
programming habits, affects grades, is misunderstood (by non-MUD people), proves difficult to gain
game experience, exhibits various implementation problems.
                                          SUMMARY
Even though the respondents seemed to be straining to find positive reasons for involvement their
concerns with the negative aspects are both encouraging and unexpected.  Some players listed
only negative influences or listed the negatives first, a possible indication of subliminal concern. 
For the most part it is felt that most players realize the snares of such pastime, or have learned
about them from watching grades plummet or having friendships dwindle away.
                                         EXAMPLES
(Responses have been edited to more clearly define positive and negative answers)
10) (+) It gives everyone a chance to get to know each other without physical looks or 
        nervous actions change the point of view of the conversation.
    (+) Helps build confidence in oneself, as people are not inclines to be very negative 
        over MUDs.
  (+/-) It can lead to relationships that are no more than a affair on the network, not in real 
        life.
    (-) MUD takes a lot of time, if one allows it to.
    (-) it can kill grades / productivity.

10) (+) I am able to talk about my problems.
    (-) You can get so involved in the game that it takes over your whole life.

11. & 12.)    MUD and Personal Identity Profiles 
                                          INTENT
to gauge the personal differences between real life and 
how people view themselves on MUD.
                                          RESULTS
The many respondents for the most varied little from their MUD identity to their personal identity. 
The ages--for example--of the players were about the same on both sides of the terminal.  With
one exception the vast majority of the surveys came from players in their late teens to their late
twenties, placing them in high school or college.  Some painted themselves a little older (and
perhaps wiser), while others pictured themselves as a particular cartoon or movie character.  There
were some players that had multiple MUD identities for either playing on the same or a different
MUD.  Supposedly changing characters as MUD and situation dictates.
                                          SUMMARY
The assessments for this section are possibly the most difficult to divine due to the very nature of
the data.  However, some parallels can be drawn.  (It is suggested that the Appendix B in the back
of this document be reviewed to gather the true scope of general statements that will be made
here.)  A was mentioned earlier for the most part the profiles of an individual were coherent and
thoughtful.  Most of the confusion expressed revolved around individual questions like the "age"
of their MUD character.  Many individual considered their characters age to be the amount of time
it had been in existence MUD rather than chronological human reference.  Also many questions
were raised about "family status" on MUD.  The profile confusion about "age", "family status" and
the like are most probably due to the fact that most of the questions generated were based on the
"Kender Kove MUD" with which I am most familiar.  Very few respondents went with a "cross
gender" MUD character.  For the most part, unless their "other half" had a specific role with well
defined boundaries most male surveyors and other MUD participants I spoke to disliked crossing
the gender line because they found the role next to impossible to maintain and didn't like it when
"crowds keep drooling" after them and generally found it irritating to continue on in the game. 
Fewer Women wanted to attempt being Men then Men who attempted to be Women.  Without
attracting serious venom from the female participants, it is speculated that this tendency could be
accounted for if the Men were more willing to experiment or the Women involved in the survey
were secure enough in themselves that they had little desire to "see how the other half lives."  One
interesting aspect of the data were the participants who maintain multiple MUD personalities.  In
some cases as many as five different characters at a single MUD site.  Again this seemed to be
a Male trend where the woman were content to work with an individual character that in many
cased appeared well rounded and better developed.

                                   Our farewell address 
                              (Summation and final comments)
        MUD'ing is poorly received at universities primarily due to its drain of academic resources. 
Some universities have banned MUD participation such as the University of Maryland and Queens
University which have moved to end to MUD'ing on the work-stations in their computer labs.  The
reason for this ban was not necessarily due to the drain on CPU time, or memory, but is more
likely a result of students belligerently taking up space on work-station in order to open extra
communication windows to make it possible to Multi-MUD.  This can tie entire computer labs for
hours while students who require the work-stations for class sit and wait.  Beyond banning all
participation in MUD to students there are methods and routines that can be derived to remind
players that MUD is only a game while relieving the drain on university resources.  At some
universities this is done in several ways.  MUD players tieing up phone-in modem lines can be
disconnected to make room for in-coming calls.  Routines can be derived to lock-out MUD during
prime usage hours.  The same type of people that might abuse resources with MUD will take
advantage of almost any situation if given the chance.  There will always be instances of abusing
the system.  However, for every problem that exists with MUD activity there are solutions which
many progressive Universities have already instituted.  
        Very few of the people who responded to the survey seemed likely to be of that ilk.  On
the whole it was found that most of MUD players that been polled were very responsible.  If the
majority of people were as aware of the negative factors involved with watching television there
would most likely be less "couch potatoes" and better programming to appeal to the higher quality
of viewer.  
        As long as the perspective is maintained that "MUD is only a game" there should be no
more concern about MUD players then the individuals that slump in front of the "boob tube" night
after night.  At least with MUD their is inter-personal communication.  People are talking.  These
conversations are not always on the most academic levels, but at the very minimum there are
brains cells responding to two-way communication stimuli rather the one sided media deluge that
assaults society in general.
        For those waiting for an endorsement or condemnation of MUD they will find nothing
beyond the following comments.  As a whole this project was a stimulating window into a new and
different world. Although there may be much criticism about MUD, mainly from the University
establishments, it can be a valuable asset for stretching personal imagination and in the case MUD
administration give the ardent computer Scientist valuable experience at interpreting and debugging
what is termed in Computer Science circles as "Spaghetti Code".  Although there are
considerations of tieing up University resources we have attempted to describe solutions for that
as well.
        MUD is neither good or bad.  the evil lies in the abuse of a unique and imaginative game.
The survival of MUDs around the world rests with the administrators of the different MUDs.  In the
future may have to include the role of counselor as well as curator of their respective games.  They
must be the ones on the front lines of human as well as computer resource conservation.

