From: iiitac@pyramid.swansea.ac.uk (Alan Cox)
Newsgroups: rec.games.mud
Subject: A history of MUD


>Hey! Haven't you read "The New Hacker's Dictionary" by Eric Raymond? The
>entry for "BartleMUD" includes the phrase "Some MUDders intensely dislike
>Bartle ...". You're RUINING my image here!

>AberMUD was one of the (many) games written by people who cut their teeth on
>MUD1. I didn't write any of the code in Aber, but I did meet Alan Cox at a
>computer show once and can confirm he was so full of ideas on writing MUDs
>that we've yet to see the best of him.


Well I don't think complements about MUD ideas can come from a more worthy
and proven source.. if you never played MUD1 you haven't seen the past
(and in many cases a still to be realised future) of MUD.
	
Ok I spose I better put my spoke in here. AberMUD was very much inspired by
MUD1. At the time it ROCK and MIST (using the same system) were the only MUD
games in the UK academic community. It's hard to describe the atmosphere of
MUD1, not just the game but the people and the way it worked. Suffice to say
the bunches of us who sat around at 2am waiting for MUD to begin speak about
it in the same way as the bunches of hackers whose eyes go sort of glazed
as they remember toggled the boot sequence into the first PDP they ever used.
AberMUD was sort of an accident, a guy called Leon Thrane (Atropos on MUD1,
and one of the few mud players who could ever say 'I never attacked another
player') had an Amiga 1000 and decided we could write a MUD on that. At the
time the only alternative was a Honeywell L66, we didnt get unix accounts
that year. Leon got a few bits working initially on an ACT Sirius (MS-DOS 1,
Lattice C 1.13) in the 24hr terminal room, and soon moved onto the Amiga in
disgust.

In the meantime me and Jim Finnis(aka White the Wizard) got sidetracked away
from Leons MUD project, mainly because he had to do it in his room on his
Amiga. He also acquired a girlfriend which put MUD development right out of
the window. We ended up writing several silly utilities in B, for the honeywell
including a bulletin board and a chat system. This got to take most of our
time as Rob Newson (Whalemeat) and Alec Muffet(Roadrunner - he of Crack fame)
were writing a different bulletin board at UCL and naturally we all had to
compete. 

In the second year at university the computer science departments aging
vax 11/750 finally got superceded by a biggish Sun3 and we also got accounts
on it. With the Sun we could finally do work on a Unix system without 
harming real work going on. Leon started a thing called 'Lance' which had
it been finished would have been akin too, but probably neater than LpMUD.
We wrote sections for Lance, and got a sort of nice little test scenario
with a pub, a bit of forest and some shoreline, but because Lance was
experimental and not many people could play on it (only a few computer 
scientists) we got a bit impatient.

The final straw was when R.W. Ash (the computer centre system manager) said
'You can't write a multiuser game on the Honeywell - it doesnt have the
facilities neccessary' when aksked about the best approach. One night I 
took the talker to the bulletin board and added room descriptions too it.
A few days later I added a few rooms and objects - AberMUD was born. At
this point you still got the talker and mud mixed, and you typed '.g' as
a talker command to go into game mode. You can still see large chunks of
the talker code in AberMUDx x<5 today as a result of this.

AberMUD had one thing over Lance - it worked and it worked now, it also had
a problem in being a mess but we lived with it and it got worse and worse.
Richard Acott (Moog) was floating around so I said to him 'Write me some
rooms for AberMUD.. the next day Doiley Woods (from a kiddies TV series)
appeared, and later on many other strange and peculiar places. Within a
couple of months AberMUD1 was credible. Soon after it was detached
from the bulletin board and ran seperately.

AberMUD1 hit 600 rooms and shortly afterwards the process size limit on
the Honeywell. We tidied up the code and started on a serious AberMUD
(AberMUD2) which contains the core 300 or so rooms of AberMUD 3,4 today.

We also did a Unix port, and shortly afterwards Ian Smith (Wraistlyn)
ran a copy in the UK as a guy called 'Piper' wanted to run a copy in the
USA - and due to the huge difficulties in those days (1988) wanted it
to work and not to have to fetch many editions. The US AberMUD is derived
from a slightly later version which ran for a while open access in southampton
university. AberMUD wasn't a bad game but its real feature was that people
could have it and look at the source. A lot of people suddenely realised
that writing MUD's wasn't some mystical problem, but a piece of easy
programming.

AberMUD4 is a story I can't take up as it happened while I was away from
academia (I failed an accessory physics course). In actual fact I had an
AberMUD4 (two of them in truth) the first got lost in the sea when my 3.5"
disk holding it (I was writing it on my amiga) and the backup fell into the
sea near aberystwyth (I was walking across the beach from Aberystwyth to
Clarach Bay - a hard but fun walk if you take at least 2 people and watch
the tide - much recommended), the second was an experimental game runing
on Sinclair Spectrum 48K  (Z80A, 48K of RAM, 3.5MHz) in Z80 assembler.
It also had a microdrive (a 100K 7 second access floppy tape) and a network
interface based on 31.5K and very midi like. I got it supporting 16 users
on one 48K spectrum quite acceptably.

After that silly little experiment I started writing a game based upon  a lot
of Leon & my ideas about Lance, and also doing all the bits Leon said
'You can't do'. This grew into AberMUD5 and I wrote a 350 room scenario for it.
At the time I was working for a company called 'Horrorsoft' who were developing
Personal Nightmare, and later on Elvira games. AberMUD5's driver became used
single user and with graphics fo Elvira (and now ElviraII). 

I turned up back at University this time in Swansea (Abertawe in welsh) and
after a while something wonderful happened - the University gave the computer
society a surplus old machine (68010/4Mb memory/70Mb disk) to run. Very soon
it was running AberMUD3 (Slowly.. very slowly) and all the UK addons which
never made it to the US (escape completion of object names/shared memory) etc.
Someone started running a small tinymud on the computer centre pyramid just
to play with the ideas involved (not for the whole world - this was the main
service machine) and I decided I could do better - about a week later the
main core of 'YAMA' - Yet Another Multiuser Adventure was running. This was
about a 300 room game which ran for 3months or so then we killed off. Bits of
it now appear in MIST and in AberMUD5.

The computer society machine was incapable of running AberMUD5 - addressing 
limits were a bit under 1Mb of memory a process. After a log period I got
given a copy of sozobon C (a PD C compiler for the atari ST) which had 
an incredibly efficient memory allocator and passably fast one. With a bit
of work AberMUD was running in 780K instead of 1.3Mb it wanted before just
by changing memory allocator, and the system was away and running. Pretty
soon Richard Porter(Bonzo) and Dylan Williams(Potato) were adding sections
to it, and it was debugged a lot and grew up into the current 600 odd room
game AberMUD5 is today. Other people contributed sections and a port to
BSD Unix and sockets was finally done.

Alan 'Anarchy' Cox
----*(A)


PS:
One thing I am trying to trace history wise is a reference to multi user
game sin a book called 'The Dungeon Master' based on a true crime case. It
gives the impression that some kind of multiplayer gaming though with
a dungeon master but all via computers was going on in the mid 70's.


