COMBAT CONCEPTS
 
Features of combat.
 
   1) Separate formulas for chance to hit, and damage done.
 
      Basic idea is that chance to hit will be determined by
      Oppenents AC and attackers DEX.  Damage done will be determined
      by the WC of the attacking players weapon.
 
   2) Multiple attacks by player.
 
      Player will have property that tells how many attacks a player
      can make in one combat turn.  Note that the default is one
      weapon attack per combat turn.  If a player has multiple weapons
      wielded, the combat routine will determine the strongest weapon
      with a slight chance to use another wielded weapon to give some
      unpredicatability to combat.
 
   3) Multiple attacks by a weapon.
 
      A weapon itself can provide for multiple attacks with different
      damage types.  This can allow magical weapons that allow multiple
      attacks, or weapons with additional powers (ie, firestrike)
 
   4) Armours with defences against specific damage types.
 
      In the combat sequence, when a weapon attacks a player, the
      armour can decide to give adjustments to the AC based on the
      type of attack (ie, ring of protection from fire)
 
   5) Suspension of combat.
 
      A player can be forced to be suspended from combat because
      of sleep, hold person, entanglement, fear, etc.
 
   6) Suspension of combat while casting spells.
 
      A spell can force the player to be unable to make attacks
      until the spell is complete, the player recovered, etc.
 
   7) Combat messages are handled in the weapon object.
 
      This is done to allow custom messages for different weapons.
      These will be regulated by wizards of combat to make sure they
      are consistant and describe damage done properly.  Standard
      type weapons will have default messages.
 
   8) Wearing and wielding.
 
      Will mostly remain the same.  A player will have an array
      of slots that he/she can put stuff.  Weapons will define
      the number of hands.  Armour will define what type and where
      it can go.  Armour and weapons can be merged to allow shields
      that you can attack with, etc.
 
   9) Formulas:
      
      chance_to_hit = ( 45+5*DEX ) - ( ( (AC-1) * 25) / 10 )
         DEX = attackers dexterity
         AC  = opponents total AC depending on damage type of attack
         This will be a percentage chance to hit.
 
      damage = random( wc + 1 ) + 1 - ADJUST
         ADJUST = query of defenders armours for a damage adjustment
                  on this type of damage on this attack.
         How much damage will be done on a specific hit.
 
  10) basic combat algorithm.  ~/hanarra/com.c
 
