TODO: Rewrite me.
These are the rules for a wizard:

 0. Wizards Do Not Meddle With Mortals.

    This is the central rule. As a wizard, you are a servant to _all_
    players. You must not use your immense powers to hinder players or
    to easen their gameplay.
    But note that of course you may still interact with players and
    even play the game - given that you don't use your wizard powers
    during playing (that's not an easy demand!).

 1. Be consistent and fair.

    One Step Beyond is supposed to be in the "long distant past", offering a
    partially hard but fair gameplay.
    It is easy to invent airplanes or hyper-monsters, but both easily
    spoils atmosphere and fun for the players if done improperly and
    in too large amounts.
    The domain lords and archwizards made rules about what is
    considered 'consistent' and 'fair' - follow them.

 2. Do not exploit weaknesses.

    Nothing's ever perfect - neither the code of the Mud, nor its
    people, nor its social rules (like these).
    You will sometimes find bugs or even features which could be used
    to harm others, offer unintended advantages, slow the mud down, or
    even crash it.
    Simply don't exploit them.

 3. If in doubt: Ask!

    It is not possible to make an explicite rule for every possible
    situation. And ignoring the rules is as bad as sticking too much
    to them.
    Grasp the spirit of these rules and use your common sense. 
    If you doubt that you can't manage a given situation correctly,
    don't hesitate to ask the older wizards. 
    If there is noone there to ask, and the situation at hand really 
    needs immediate action, do what you seem appropriate, and inform the
    elder ones about what you did and why.

 4. The players rules still apply.

    Don't do things you won't want to happen to you. 
    Players and wizards are personalities. Respect their opinions and
    human rights. 
    If someone wants you to stop bothering him, stop.

 5. One Step Beyond trusts you.

    As long as you try to not disappoint it, you can't do much wrong.


The file /doc/w/wizfaq contains a collection of common situations and
recommended actions thereupon.
