1. Aim:

Aiming

You can't advance the aim ability. It will raise whenever one of your arrows
hits its aim. To aim you must have a bow wielded. To shoot you must also
have arrows. This is how to do it:
1) Type 'exits' to see in which directions you can aim.
2) Type 'aim <dir>'. Where <dir> is the name of one of the exits.
   You will then get a discription of that room and the monsters it con-
   tains.
3) Type 'shoot <monster>'. Where <monster> is the name of one of the mon-
   sters that are in that room.
   An arrow will be shot on that monster. If it hits the damage it does de-
   pends on how far your aim ability is advanced. The higher it is advanced,
   the higher the chance that your arrow hits the monster. If it hits a mon-
   ster it will reduce an amount of HP in the range of 0 HP up to
   10+(aim/10) HP.

Commands: AIM <dir> and SHOOT <monster>

Note: You can't use the abbreviations for dircetions. That means that you
will have to type 'aim west' instead of 'aim w'.

2. Ban:

Bandage

The bandage ability allows you to bandage wounded players. To do this, you
need bandages. You can buy them in the storage-room of this guild.
How much the wounded player is healed when you bandage him, depends on
how far you have advanced your bandage ability. A bandage can only used once.
When a player is wearing a bandage, he can't be bandaged again until the ban-
dage falls into pieces (this is to prevent players from healing themselfs too
much).

Commands: BANDAGE <player>

3. Cri:
 
Critical Hit

The critical hit ability gives you the chance to hit a monster critically
(that means kill it with one hit). It will now work with any weapon except
magical weapons like the short sword made of ivory or the orc-slayer.
You can't advance this ability higher than to 70%.

4. Fig:

Fighting

You can't advance the fighting ability. It will raise whenever you kill a
monster. The higher the fighting ability, the harder you will hit your
opponent. You can now make use of this ability with any weapon, execept for
special weapons which have their own special functions like a higher WC
against a special kind of opponent, for example the sword of Mr. Sandman.
You don't need the sword from the guild any longer.

5. Hid:

Hide

The hide ability allows you to hide when monsters want to attack you.
How long you can stay undiscovered in your hideout depends on how far
your hide-ability is advanced. If you have advanced it to 100% you can
stay in your hideout for about ten minutes.
From your hideout you can watch the monsters and wait. Then you can attack
one of the monsters from behind surprisingly. If you attack a monster from
your hideout, you may hit it much harder then you will normally hit it.

Commands: HIDE to hide,
	  LEAVE to leave your hideout without attacking a monster,
	  ATTACK <monster> to leave your hideout and attack a monster.

6. Luk:

Luck

Little is known about luck. Normally you can't influence your luck, but a few
sorcerers know a spell named 'enchant luck'.
If your luck is very high, you will be able to hit monsters critically
more often than usual.

7. Mul:

'Mul' means multiple hit. The higher the value the higher the chance that
you will hit a monster twice.
Go to the next branch of the fighters' guild to advance this ability.
Advancing 'Mul' costs the same as advancing 'Cri' or 'Par'.

8. Par:

Parry

The parry ability allows you to parry the strikes of your opponent. Now
you don't need the guild sword any longer. You can now use any weapon you
like, but don't forget to wear the shield you got from the guildmaster.
If you parry a strike, you won't get hit. You can't advance this ability to
more than 70%.

9. The Book of Prayers

There are two versions of the book:
a) The Book of Prayers (to the gods of light)
b) The Book of Prayers (to the gods of darkness)

The difference between these books is that one contains a prayer named bright-
ness and one contains a prayer named darkness (trolls, orc, etc need darkness
while elves, humans, etc need light).

The prayers are:

1. brightness/darkness (8 SP)
   Let the book glow or let it be dark.
2. magic misslie (8 SP)
   This is the familiar combat spell we all know from NF I.
3. bless weapon (50 SP)
   Increase the WC of a weapon by one (only once).
4. know alignment (5 SP)
   Find out what the alignment of somebody is.  
5. consider (costs no SP)
   Find out if an opponent is stronger or weaker than you.
   Weapons, HP and STR do take influence on the formula, but armours do not.
   So if an opponent is stronger than you, but you have a better armour,
   you may win a fight against him.
