This should be the first start of a guilds concept:

Remember YOU vote me for the job and now i try to do it right.

Here i will write some thoughts i think how to build a guild and 
what a guild should be.


First how to organizate the guild.

On the top of the guild is your place. Because you are the owner of it.
Maybe you can have a vice if you like it.
Your and your vice shop will be to code the guild and the guilds
abilities, debug it and put new things in.

As next i think its a good idea to have some (6-10) guildcommanders.
(More about them you can read under ~balgarion/concepts/guildc)
This should be players of high guild levels. They are players of your 
choice and have some great power. You are responsible for them so be sure 
that they are serious and dont misuse this power.

The rest of the guild members will then be normal players.


And now how i think about guilds:

I think a GOOD guild isnt only a good offensive or defensive weapon.
It should give their members more funny things and the members should
come to a group which help each other.

The next point is the costs of the guild powers.

Because the players become more powerfull by join a guild they should do
more than spend some experience or money.
Why not doing some quest for each guild level? Think about it and let 
discuss it!


A little example for funny guild power:

( I got it from Dopplegangers guild in Nirvana4 )
Guild level 9 (the highest) spell points cost 65:
Vandalize : spray your name all over the walls in the room you are.
            When another comes in he read " name" was here
            This will stay for nearly 600sec in the room


Some things i think a guild should have:

- a rescue spell: teleport a player back to the guild
- a secret guild room: only for members of the guild
- a secret guild commander room: only for guild commanders and the builter
                                 to discuss and relax or chat.
- faster healing in the guild room ? (such for discussing)
- a private guild shop or storage room
- private guild talking line.



I hope you will read that and make some thoughts about it.


Your Balgarion.
