Rules for Guilds in Nightfall                 Last change: 26-Apr-93
-----------------------------

General rules:
--------------
1.) Every guild should be consistent.
      The abilities and drawbacks the players get there should fit
      into the guild's concept. E.g. no healing for mages, no magic
      spells for fighters, "steal" ability for thieves and the like.
2.) Guilds should be balanced.
      We don't want to have something like a "best guild" in Nighfall,
      so make sure that your guild doesn't provide powerful abilities
      without additional drawbacks. Players should not join a guild
      because it makes playing easier, guilds should make playing
      more colourful and interesting.
3.) Every Guild should be unique.
      The members of your guild should have something that makes them
      different from other players. If you intend to build a guild,
      first look at the guilds that are already there. There is no
      reason for having two competing guilds with similar concepts.
4.) Don't make your guild too complex.
      Players should be able to understand their new abilities.
5.) If you want to make a futuristic guild, ask the department of
    guilds first. We already have one (the cyberfighters), and since
    Nightfall's main theme is medieval fantasy, too much futuristic
    stuff would spoil the game's atmosphere.

A GOOD guild is not only a good offensive or defensive weapon.
It should have a background and perhaps a history. 
It should also give their members some useless/funny things,
and the members should be encouraged to team up and help each other.


How to organize the guild:
--------------------------------
On top of the guild building should be a your office, because you
are its creator. Maybe you can have a vice if you like it.
Your and your vice's job will be to code the guild and the guild's
abilities, debug it and put new things in.

It's also a good idea to have some (6-10) guild commanders.
(Further info in /d/archwiz/common/guilds/commanders)
This should be players of high guild levels. They are players of your 
choice and have some great powers. You are responsible for them so be
sure that they are serious and don't abuse this power.

The rest of the guild members will be normal players.


Cost of guild powers:
---------------------
Because the players become more powerful by joining a guild, every
guild must have some drawbacks, e.g. a tithe or armour/weapon
restrictions. But guild members should do more than spend some
experience or money. So every guild must have at least one extra quest
its members have to solve.


Some things all guilds should have:
-----------------------------------
- a secret guild room : only for members of the guild
- a secret guild
  commander room      : only for guild commanders and the creator
                             for discussions, relaxing or chatting
- a private guild shop or storage room
- a private guild talking line.


An example for a funny guild power:
-----------------------------------
( Balgarion got it from Doppleganger's guild in Nirvana4 )

Guild level 9 (the highest), cost : 65 SP
Vandalize : Spray your name all over the walls in the room you are.
            When another player comes in, he reads "Balgarion was here."
            This will stay for about 600sec in the room.


--
Rover & Balgarion, dept. of guilds in Nightfall.
