1. Ani:

Animalism

This ability will allow you to call a wolf to aid you in a fight.
The higher the ability the better you'll be at calling a wolf.
To call a wolf just type 'call wolf'.
It costs no spellpoints to call the wolf, but some to keep the wolf
in the same room with you. A wolf can only be called once per reset
and you won't get any XP when killing your own wolf.

2. Aus:

Auspex

This ability allows you to see someones aura (i. e. to see his alignment).
The lower this ability the more often you will fail to examine someone's
aura.
To have a look at someone's aura type 'aura <who>'.

3. Dom:

Dominate

This ability will allow you to hypnotize a NPC and let it do what you want,
but you can't bring it to kill someone or to drop something.
Type 'hypnotize <target>' to hypnotize someone. You can't hypnotize active
players. Type 'let <name> <command>' to let the person you hypnotized to a
command. For example:
i) hypnotize orc
ii) let orc west
The higher your domination-ability the higher the chance that you'll be able
to hypnotize your victim.

4. Obf:

Obfuscate

This ability will allow you to make yourself invisible.
The higher the ability the longer you will stay invisible.
Type 'invisibility' to become invisible and also 'invisibility' when
you are invisible and want to be visible again.

5. Scare:

Type 'scare <victim>' to scare somebody. Your victim will run out of the
room in panic if you scare it (if it is no wizard).

6. Tha:

Thaumaturgy

Vampires have a few spells. How much spells they have depends on how
high the value of 'Tha' is.
Spells are:
Tha<2  eye:    you'll get glowing red eyes which will protect your eyes from
	       the rays of the sun
Tha<3  claws:  you'll get dangerous wolf claws
Tha<4  taste:  steal some BP from another vampire
	       usage: taste <victim>
Tha<5  bat:    
       If you type 'bat', you will turn into a bat. You are then flying high
       above the heads of other players and monsters and they can't attack you.
       Type 'land' if you want to land. You will then turn back into a vampire
       automatically. As a nice effect there will be a puff of smoke when you
       turn into a bat.
Tha=5  flames: burn everybody who is in the same room as you. (100 SP)

7. Biting:
  Type 'bite <target>' to bite someone. You can't bite somebody who has some
  garlic and you can't bite a vampire. Biting someone will give you a few more
  HP if you are not healthy. You can bite a victim up to 4 times.
  You will get 1 BP for each bite. You need 10 BP to advance one of your
  vampire abilities. Use 'advance' to advance a ability.
  Example: advance dom
	   advance obf
           advance tha
           advance ani
	   advance aus
  Each ability has a range from 0 to 5.
  You don't need to be in a guild to advance your abilities.
  Note: Some players may carry a cross with them. You can bite them if you are
  quick enough. But if they show their cross to you, you will flee in panic.
  So bite ere they can grap their cross!
