The Guild of Psionics --- underlying concepts       Rover, 14-Apr-93
---------------------------------------------

It has long been known to scholars and the wise that the Universe
is alive with Powers beyond the wildest imagination of mere mortals.
In dark forgotten ages there came a wizard of terrifying power and
taught his disciples to master these forces. With much training and
the chanting of arcane phrases a man could bend the Powers to his
own will. Soon the world was abounding with weavers of Magic. 

But the wheels of evolution grind inexorably forward and a man was
born into the world whose mind itself was tuned to the Powers.
He saw what no other man could see, the powers of Earth and Sky,
of Life and Oblivion, streaming crystal clear in the eddies of
his mind.

Troubled by the storm inside his head he set out to discover the
source. He found a vortex in the Cosmos where the powers met and
the strength was so overwhelming that it nearly destroyed him.
The ground beneath this vortex contained a strange metal which
acted like a conductor for the Powers. From this substance he
fashioned a finely woven headband, one strand for each of the
Powers. The first Psionic was born!

[excerpt from Aquila's original guild concept]

The Guild of Psionics is based on Aquila's original guild of old NF 1.
Aquila had already built a new psionic guild that was near completion,
but after we changed to native mode none of his files was working
anymore. It is this new Guild of Psionics that I am currently working
on, as Aquila does not have the time to do it by himself.

The guild will be something special, and I hope players will think
of it not as 'one out of x possible guilds'. Being a psionic means
working close together with other guild members, at least because
the guild's most powerful ability, metaconcert, requires all logged in
psionics to join their powers to be most effective.

There are many fun abilities with no 'practical use', just to make
the feeling of being a psionic more intense.

There will be no race/alignment restrictions for joining, since
psionics are philosophers and far beyond such petty prejudices.
(But, of course, dumb characters will have severe problems to master
 the more powerful abilities.)

There will be four "guild quests", each is related to one of the four
psionic attributes.

The guild will be placed in some sort of "astral plane", with many
hidden entrances all over Nightfall.

The guild rooms are ready now, enter from ~rover/psi/entry please.
The door to the south is a special exit, only guild members and learners
(or higher wizlevels) may go through it.

See the files about rules and abilities for further info.
